h1. rah_sitemap

p. "Project page":http://rahforum.biz/plugins/rah_sitemap | "Twitter":http://twitter.com/gocom | "GitHub":https://github.com/gocom/rah_sitemap | "Support forum":http://forum.textpattern.com/viewtopic.php?id=28279 | "Donate":http://rahforum.biz/donate/rah_sitemap

p. Rah_sitemap is a sitemap plugin for "Textpattern CMS":http://www.textpattern.com. Easily build valid "Sitemaps.org":http://www.sitemaps.org XML(eXtensible Markup Language) sitemaps for search engines, including Google. Supports categories, sections, articles and even custom URLs. All settings can be managed from clean interface. No dive to code required.

h2. Basics

p. Rah_sitemap generates a sitemap for your Textpattern website, listing all of its section-, article category- and article-pages. The generated sitemap follows the XML based "Sitemap protocol format":http://www.sitemaps.org/ and is targeted to search engines, opposed to your visitors.

p. The sitemap can be configured directly from Textpattern's Preferences panel, making rah_sitemap very easy to setup and use. The plugin itself takes care of the rest.

h3. Accessing the sitemap

p. The generated sitemap is publicly accessible from the site's root. The sitemap can be accessed from two URLs, depending on the site's "Permanent Link Mode":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Basic_Preferences#Permanent_Link_Mode. If the site is configured to use "clean URLs":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Talk:Managing_Clean_URLs the sitemap can be accessed using an optional clean path:

bc. http://example.com/sitemap.xml

p. In both the messy and the clean URL mode the query version can be used too:

bc. http://example.com/?rah_sitemap=sitemap

p. In the above URLs @example.com@ would be the "site's URL":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Basic_Preferences#Site_URL as specified in Textpattern's "Basic Preferences":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Basic_Preferences.

h3. Immediate boost to search engine visiblity?

p. Not exactly. Providing Sitemap is to help crawling, finding your site's pages. Pages that are otherwise hard to discover. Sitemaps itself do not boost content's visibility.

p. For a simple, almost static website with just few easily discoverable pages, a sitemap may not be necessary at all. If search engines already can know about your pages with no issues, you do not really need rah_sitemap or Sitemaps in general. Once a page is indexed, that's where the sitemap's work end in increasing discoverability.

p. Rah_sitemap is particularly useful when your site has pages that are hard to discover due to being loaded using Ajax, there is way too much distinct content that don't link to each other, or pages are nested deep in a complex page structure. Rah_sitemap can also help your site to start up when it has very few links point to it's pages.

p. It's common misconception to think that Sitemaps guarantee that pages will be indexed. This is not the case. Sitemap is a map. Whether a place is marked on a map doesn't mean someone will actually go there, or when. Like any map, the map is used to find and learn, to increase the future knowledge. Update interval also helps to estimate when your site is updated next and when it should be crawled again.

p. Normally, you will benefit from submitting a sitemap, but its just one piece in the puzzle. In no case will you get penalized from Sitemap or including the wrong content in it.

h2. List of features

* Simple interface and options integrated to Textpattern's native preferences panel.
* Filter, include and exclude section, category and article URLs from the sitemap.
* No need to create files nor set permissions, instead of just use the plugin and eventually submit the sitemap URL to Google (via Webmaster tools) and other search engines.
* Sitemap is automatically compressed.

h2. Requirements

p. Rah_sitemap's minimum requirements:

* Textpattern 4.5.0 or newer.

h2. Installing

p. Rah_sitemap's installation follows the standard plugin installation steps.

# Download the plugin installation code.
# Copy and paste the installation code into the _Install plugin_ box of your Textpattern Plugin pane.
# Run the automated setup.
# After the setup is done, activate the plugin. Done.

h2. Configuration

p. After the rah_sitemap is installed, you may want to do some configuration to it, like for instance exclude certain articles and sections from the sitemap. The plugin's settings can be configured from Textpattern's "Advanced Preferences":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Advanced_Preferences panel, organized under *Sitemap* section. "Sections":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Sections and "Categories":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Categories can be configured and removed from the sitemap from the respectful editors.

h3. Sending the sitemap to search engines

p. Once you have a sitemap up and running, you now should inform search engines about it. There are few ways you can do it. There is "Webmaster Tools":http://www.google.com/webmasters/ for Google, you could use a "robots.txt":http://www.robotstxt.org/ directive and do pinging.

p. To use a robots.txt file to inform about your sitemap's location, you will need access to create a file at the root of the domain named @robots.txt@. In that file you would add a @Sitemap@ directive containing an absolute URL to your sitemap:

bc. Sitemap: http://www.example.com/?rah_sitemap=sitemap

p. Where the @http://www.example.com/@ is your site's location as defined in Textpattern's Preferences panel.

p. If this all about robots.txt seems complicated, or you don't have full access to the domain's root contents, then the easiest and the most user friendly method would be to use a search engine's own interface to do the informing about the location. For instance, Google offers "Webmaster Tools":http://www.google.com/webmasters/ which allow you to send in and validate sitemaps from a graphical user interface.

h2. Preferences

p. Rah_sitemap comes with number of preferences which all can be found from the "Advanced Preferences":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Advanced_Preferences, organized under a *Sitemap* section. Rah_sitemap allows excluding sections, categories and articles from the XML sitemap. Following options will be present.

h3. Exclude articles based on fields

p. The field can be used to exclude articles from the sitemap based on any article field and its value. The option takes a comma-separated list of @articlefield: value@ pairs. Where the field is the of the database field and the value is the field's value that will be excluded. Available fields include: @Title@, @AuthorID@, @Body@, @Excerpt@, @Category1@, @Category2@, @Section@, @Keywords@, @url_title@, @custom_1@ to @custom_10@ and @Image@.

p. Values used in the option support two wildcard characters. An underscore (@_@) matches exactly one character, and a percent sign (@%@) matches zero or more characters.

p. If you wanted to exclude articles posted to "sections":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=sections _notes_ and _private_ or by a user _mailer_, you could use the following as the setting:

bc. Section: notes, Section: private, AuthorID: mailer

h3. Additional URLs

p. Comma-separated list of additional local site URLs added to the sitemap. Note that sitemaps only allow local URLs, meaning that any URL used, needs to link to the same domain as the website. If an URL is relative and doesn't start with a HTTP or HTTPS protocol, the site's URL is prepended to the URL.

h3. Include future articles?

p. If set to Yes, articles with publishing date set to a future date, are visible in the sitemap. Please note that by default "article":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=article tag doesn't display future articles, unless its @time@ attribute is explicitly set to include @future@.

h3. Include published articles?

p. If set to Yes, published, Live, articles are visible in the sitemap. If both this option and _Include future articles?_ are set to No, no articles will be visible in the sitemap.

h3. Include expired articles?

p. If set to No, expired articles are not visible in the sitemap.

h3. Exclude sticky articles?

p. If set to Yes, "sticky":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Write#Sticky articles are not visible in the sitemap.

h2. Extras and modules

p. Rah_sitemap supports modules. The plugin's own modules can be used to add new functionality.

* "Links":https://github.com/gocom/rah_sitemap__links - displays Textpattern's links in the sitemap.

h2. For developers

p. Rah_sitemap has small set of tools developers can use. These tools allow other Textpattern plugins to extend rah_sitemap's functionality by adding new URLs to the sitemap. The plugin has a public callback events anyone can use and a tiny PHP API.

h3. API

p. Rah_sitemap has a small public application interface that allows adding URLs to the XML sitemap. The following methods are available.

h4. rah_sitemap::get()

bc. object rah_sitemap::get()

p. Gets an instance of the class. The @get()@ method should be used when accessing rah_sitemap class instead of new. The method has no parameters.

h4. rah_sitemap::url()

bc. object rah_sitemap::url(string $url [,int|string $lastmod = NULL])

p. This method adds an URL to the sitemap. The @$url@ can be absolute or relative. The @$lastmod@ can take an integer or a data/time string. If NULL or undefined, no lastmod timestamp is given for URL in the sitemap.

bc. rah_sitemap::get()
	->url('/path/to/page', '2012-06-23 10:56:32');

p. The above would add a single URL pointing to @http://mysite.com/path/to/page@ to the sitemap.

h3. Callback

p. Rah_sitemap introduces a new public-facing callback event to the Textpattern's event library named  @rah_sitemap.urlset@. The event is fired before a sitemap is printed out. The callback event can be used with the API to add new URLs to the sitemap.

p. As with other callback events in Textpattern, hooking to rah_sitemap's event happens using Textpattern's callback handling functions, mainly "register_callback":http://textpattern.net/wiki/index.php?title=Plugin_Development_Guidelines#Callbacks.

bc. register_callback(callable $callback, 'rah_sitemap.urlset');

h3. Custom URL functions

p. If you are supplying a custom URL function for Textpattern, please note that the URLs the function generates need to meet "RFC 3986":http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3986.txt and "RFC 3987":http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3987.txt. All URLs should also be entity escaped from special syntax characters using Textpattern's "txpspecialchars":http://code.google.com/p/textpattern/source/detail?r=3818 function. All URLs Textpattern itself generates follow these specifications, and so should your custom URL plugin.

p. As rah_sitemap integrates well with Textpattern's core, it uses the same URL functions as Textpattern. If an URL given to the sitemap doesn't meet those specification, the sitemap will become invalid.

h2. Changelog

h3. Version 1.3 - upcoming

* Changed: Integrated preferences to Textpattern's native preferences panel, and to Section and Category editors.
* Added: Language strings, interface is now translatable using Textpacks.
* Added: Finnish translation.
* Added: French translation by "Patrick Lefevre":https://twitter.com/lowel.
* Removed: Number of extra configuration options including zlib-fixes, compression and custom URL formats.
* Improved: Zlib and gzip options are checked and dealt with automatically.
* Improved: Compatibility with Textpattern 4.5.
* Now requires Textpattern 4.5 or newer.

h3. Version 1.2 - 2011/03/09

* Added: adds site URL to relative article permlinks. Basically a fix for gbp_permanent_links.
* Changed: from permlinkurl_id() to permlinkurl(). Greatly reduced the amount of queries generating article permlinks makes.

h3. Version 1.1 - 2010/10/30

* Fixed issues appearing with the installer when MySQL is in strict mode. "Thank you for reporting, Gallex":http://forum.textpattern.com/viewtopic.php?pid=236637#p236637.

h3. Version 1.0 - 2010/10/29

* Slightly changed backend's installer call; only check for installing if there is no preferences available.

h3. Version 0.9 - 2010/08/25

* Fixed: now correctly parses category tags in category URLs. Thank you for "reporting":http://forum.textpattern.com/viewtopic.php?pid=233619#p233619, Andreas.

h3. Version 0.8 - 2010/07/27

* Now compression level field's label now links to the correct field id.
* Now suppresses E_WARNING/E_STRICT notices in live mode caused by Textpattern's timezone code when some conditions are met (TXP 4.2.0, PHP 5.1.0+, TXP's Auto-DST feature disabled, TXP in Live mode). Error suppression will be removed when TXP version is released with fully working timezone settings.
* Now generates UNIX timestamps within the SQL query, not with PHP.
* Changed sliding panels' links (@a@ elements) into spans.

h3. Version 0.7 - 2010/05/30

* Fixed: now deleting custom url leads back to the list view, not to the editing form.
* Removed some leftover inline styles from v0.6.

h3. Version 0.6 - 2010/05/30

* Rewritten the code that generates the sitemap.
* New admin panel look.
* Now custom permlink modes and custom urls are escaped. Users can input unescaped URLs/markup from now on.
* Now custom URL list shows the full formatted URL after auto-fill instead of the user input.
* Now custom URLs that start with www. are completed with http:// protocol.
* Now all urls that do not start with either http, https, www, ftp or ftps protocol are auto-completed with the site's address.
* Custom url editor got own panel. No longer the form is above the URL list.
* Added ability to manually turn gzib compression off and change the compression level.
* Added setting to set zlib.output_compression off. "See here":http://forum.textpattern.com/viewtopic.php?pid=224931#p224931, thank you for reporting superfly.
* Preferences are now trimmed during save.
* Merged @rah_sitemap_update()@ with @rah_sitemap_save()@.
* From now on all new installations have default settings defined that will automatically exclude link, file and image categories from the sitemap. This won't effect updaters.
* Changed sitemap's callback register from pre @pretext@ to callback after it (callback is now @textpattern@). Now @$pretext@ is set before the sitemap and thus more plugins might work within permlink settings and custom urls.
* When using TXP's clean URLs, requesting @/sitemap.xml.gz@ and @/sitemap.xml@ URLs will return the sitemap, not just the @/?rah_sitemap=sitemap@. This will of course require existing fully working clean urls.

h3. Version 0.5 - 2010/03/01

* Added customizable timestamp formats.
* Cleaned backend markup.
* Combined individual preference queries.

h3. Version 0.4 - 2009/04/12

* Added support for custom permlink rules: Now you can easily set any kind of permlink rules for articles, section and categories.
* Added option to exclude future articles.
* Added option to exclude past articles.
* Added option to exclude expired articles.
* Moved Custom URL UI to it's own page.
* Added multi-delete feature to Custom URL UI.
* Improved Custom URL UI.
* Removed default static appending domain from Custom URL input field.
* Changed TXP minimum requirement to version 4.0.7 (and above). Note that the plugin still works with older TXP versions (down to 4.0.5) if the _Exclude Expired articles_ -option is left empty (unset).

h3. Version 0.3.2 - 2008/10/25

* Fixed view url that still (from version 0.2) included installation address before link.

h3. Version 0.3 - 2008/10/24

* Added option to insert URLs that are outside Textpattern install directory.
* Fixed option to exclude categories directly by type: added forgotten link type.

h3. Version 0.2 - 2008/10/22

* Added option to exclude/include sticky articles.
* Added option to exclude categories directly by type.
* Fixed bug: now shows all categories, and not only article-type, in admin panel.
* Fixed bug: removed double install query (didn't do a thing, just checked table status twice).

h3. Version 0.1.2 - 2008/09/12

* Fixed article listing bug caused by nasty little typo: now only 4 and 5 statuses are listed.

h3. Version 0.1 - 2008/09/07

* First release.